xliv INTRODUCTION.

47. In his financial dealings Cicero was honorable and
high-minded. He declined to make money, as even his
friends Atticus and M. Brutus did, by loaning money at
usurious rates. His upright management of Cilicia was in
marked contrast to the almost universal practices of his
contemporaries. He paid his debts conscientiously, although
not always with promptness, because of his frequent financial
embarrassment. In some other points Cicero does not
show as strict a sense of honor: he did not scruple to open
certain letters from his brother Quintus to a third person,
which fell into his hands, and which, as he suspected,
contained slanderous statements in regard to himself13 he
dictatecl to the secretary of Atticus a letter in praise of
Caelius and then read it to Caelius as an authentic epistle
from Atticus²; in another letter he even speculates upon
the feasibility of disavowing an oration which had offended
Curio.3 The question of ethics involved in the defense of
Catiline scarcely belongs here and has been discussed else-
where.⁴ It should be remembered in partial extenuation of
these facts that the code of honor in such matters was not
‘so strict ‘in Cicero's day as it is in our own, and that
his lot was cast in times when life and fortune hung by a
slender thread.

48. Cicero's enthusiastic study of Greek and Latin
literature at Rome, and later at Athens and Rhodes, has
already been noted (ἐξ 1, 2). These habits of study con-
tinued throughout his life, and gave him such a fund of
general information as few of his contemporaries possessed,
Still he was not a man of profound learning, even in his
chosen profession. He was rather a man of cultivated tastes
and broad sympathies. Of his knowledge of the literature,
history, and antiquities of Greece and Rome, his letterS,

lAtt. 11.9.2. 3 Att. 3. 12. 2.
'2 All. 0. 6. 4. 4 Cf. Epist. II. notes.

